When Columbus discovered the New World he brought back with him to Europe many
new and curious things, one of which was cacao. Some years later, in 1519, the
Spanish conquistador, Cortes, landed in Mexico, marched into the interior and
discovered to his surprise, not the huts of savages, but a beautiful city, with
palaces and museums. This city was the capital of the Aztecs, a remarkable
people, notable alike for their ancient civilisation and their wealth. Their
national drink was chocolate, and Montezuma, their Emperor, who lived in a
state of luxurious magnificence, "took no other beverage than the chocolatl, a
potation of chocolate, flavoured with vanilla and other spices, and so prepared
as to be reduced to a froth of the consistency of honey, which gradually
dissolved in the mouth and was taken cold. This beverage if so it could be
called, was served in golden goblets, with spoons of the same metal or
tortoise-shell finely wrought. The Emperor was exceedingly fond of it, to judge
from the quantity—no less than fifty jars or pitchers being prepared for his
own daily consumption: two thousand more were allowed for that of his
household." It is curious that Montezuma took no other beverage than chocolate,
especially if it be true that the Aztecs also invented that fascinating drink,
the cocktail (xoc-tl). How long this ancient people, students of the mysteries
of culinary science, had known the art of preparing a drink from cacao, is not
known, but it is evident that the cultivation of cacao received great attention
in these parts, for if we read down the list of the tributes paid by different
cities to the Lords of Mexico, we find "20 chests of ground chocolate, 20 bags
of gold dust," again "80 loads of red chocolate, 20 lip-jewels of clear amber,"
and yet again "200 loads of chocolate."

Another people that share with the Aztecs the honour of being the first great
cultivators of cacao are the Incas of Peru, that wonderful nation that knew not
poverty. Cacao was used by the Aztecs not only for the preparation of a
beverage, but also as a circulating medium of exchange. For example, one could
purchase a "tolerably good slave" for 100 beans. We read that: "Their currency
consisted of transparent quills of gold dust, of bits of tin cut in the form of
a T, and of bags of cacao containing a specified number of grains." "Blessed
money," exclaims Peter Martyr, "which exempts its possessor from avarice, since
it cannot be long hoarded, nor hidden underground!" 

The Spanish discoverers of the New World brought home to Spain quantities of cacao, which the curious tasted. We may conclude that they drank the preparation cold, as Montezuma did, hot chocolate being a later invention. The new drink, eagerly sought by some, did not meet with universal approval, and, as was natural, the most diverse opinions existed as to the pleasantness and wholesomeness of the beverage when it was first known. The Spaniards were the first to manufacture and drink chocolate in any quantity. To this day they serve it in the old style—thick as porridge and pungent with spices. They endeavoured to keep secret the method of preparation, and, without success, to retain the manufacture as a monopoly. Chocolate was introduced into Italy by Carletti, who praised it and spread the method of its manufacture abroad. The new drink was introduced by monks from Spain into Germany and France. From France the use of chocolate spread into England, where it began to be drunk as a luxury by the aristocracy about the time of the Commonwealth. 

In 1652 a Frenchman opened the first chocolate-house. The rising popularity of chocolate led to the starting of more of these chocolate houses, at which one could sit and sip chocolate, or purchase the commodity for preparation at home.

The growing consumption of chocolate did not escape the all-seeing eye of the Chancellors of England. The raw material was also made a source of revenue. In The Humble Memorial of Joseph Fry, of Bristol, Maker of Chocolate, which was addressed to the Lords Commissioners of the Treasury in 1776 (Messrs. Fry and Sons are the oldest English firm of chocolate makers, having been founded in 1728), we read that "Chocolate ... pays two shillings and threepence per pound excise, besides about ten shillings per hundredweight on the Cocoa Nuts from which it is made." In 1784 a preferential customs rate was proposed in favour of our Colonies. This they enjoyed for many years before 1853, when the uniform rate, until recently in force, was introduced.

Reference : Cocoa And Chocolate - Their History From Plantation To Consumer
            By Arthur Knapp
